[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Even though we have
access to technology capable
of connecting us all, people
around the planet are feeling
afraid, isolated, and depressed.
According to the Anxiety
and Depression Association
of America, anxiety
disorders are the most common
mental illness in
the United States,
with 40 million adults
affected every year.
Even though anxiety is
treatable, less than 40%
of those suffering from
it receive treatment.
With so many moving
away from religion,
can psychedelic plants give us
access to our subconscious mind
to initiate the deep healing?
In the early 1900s, renowned
Swiss psychologist Carl Jung
developed dream interpretation,
a form of psychology
based around archetypal imagery.
Some of these archetypes
that he discovered
are the hero, the
lover, and the sage.
These images described
by his patients correlate
with ancient myths.
Decades later, this
same archetypal imagery
is being studied as
the visionary framework
for psychedelic experiences.
The sensation of allowing one
of these archetypes, the ego,
to die is viewed
by many as the key
to tapping into the
collective unconscious.
Rashad Evans, a UFC light
heavyweight champion,
an advocate of psychedelics,
spoke openly on The Joe Rogan
Experience about how
it changed his life
and gave him a new perspective.
>> It's about to experience
the ocean of consciousness.
And that right there was, it
was the most humbling experience
I ever had.
Just to feel my
ego who I thought
I was, what I thought I was,
completely just annihilated,
and to feel what I actually was.
It was crazy.
It feels so much bigger
and collective to me
once I started to go
down this journey.
It felt as if for the
first time in my life,
I understood what it
meant to be the oneness.
I understood it from a
conceptual point of view
before but I actually
had an experience
of feeling the oneness.
>> Psychedelics allow us
to tap into the collective
unconscious.
Not only that they allow us
to understand who we truly
are as human beings and what
is our connection to all living
things and the connection to
the intelligence in nature
and Gaia.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> But how do we let
these archetypes we create
symbolically die so that we
can connect to the oneness?
Science tried to answer
that ancient question.
In November of 2020, a
new study on psilocybin
found in magic mushrooms was
published in the journal JAMA
Psychiatry.
Using 27 test
subjects, the study
examined how
effective psilocybin
was at treating
symptoms of depression.
The researchers measured
that the psilocybin
was as much as four
times more effective
than traditional psychotherapy.
Shamanic practices go
back thousands of years
and focused on healing the
psyche with psychedelic plants.
This approach encompasses
emotional and spiritual
well-being, not
just mental health.
>> We have some vocabulary in
our society around physical
health and well-being.
We have some around mental
We have very little around
emotional and spiritual
well-being.
There is no empathic
container to process
traumatic experiences.
They happen and then
it's supposed to be done.
>> Plants have a different
gift than humans,
which is that they seem to
exist in a kind of unity
consciousness state.
And when people ingest these
sacred plant medicines,
we kind of entrain
to their state
of consciousness, which is like
a unity consciousness state.
And this in itself is incredibly
healing for the individual
and for our connection with
others and with the planet.
>> After millennia of sacred
use among various tribes,
these plants went through
a global dark age as use
of psychedelics was viewed
by the Catholic church
as heretical.
But by the mid-1900s,
the scientific community
had rediscovered
psychoactive plants
and earnestly began to study
drugs like Mescaline and LSD.
Following the end
of World War II,
psychedelic medicine
was enthusiastically
embraced and researched
by many psychiatrists.
Some of these early
studies were even
funded by government entities.
By the mid-'60s, over 1,000
research papers had been
published on psychedelics,
suggesting potential treatments
ranging from depression,
addiction, and pain relief.
But a backlash soon followed.
Critics pushed back
against a perceived lack
of long-term follow-up
and criticized
many studies' methodologies.
When some repeat studies
were unable to replicate
early results, the scientific
community's perception
of psychedelics quickly soured.
This was all happening
in an era that
was defined by cultural
shifts and civil unrest.
Psychedelic use was a major
part of various counterculture
movements and soon
became associated
with protests and social
disobedience, which
only sealed their fate in
the eyes of the government.
Despite objections from
many psychiatrists,
the Controlled
Substances Act of 1970
was passed, placing psychedelics
on the most restrictive
schedule alongside heroin.
>> Before Prohibition, my
understanding is there would be
research for a lot of different
things, psychiatric purposes.
So depression, anxiety,
looking at addiction,
known as an area of focus.
>> Psychedelics were prohibited
few decades ago because they
were misunderstood, based
on very little research,
and some research was falsified.
Also exacerbated by the fact
that people who were using them
with good intentions
did not realize
the importance of the
mindset and the setting.
So they took them in
non-controlled settings,
and that increases the
chance of harm to occur.
But now, thanks to
renewed research,
we have a different
look at them and we're
realizing that they're not
what we thought they are.
>> Today, grassroots groups
across the country are pushing
people to rethink the
prohibition of these plants.
Combined with another
movement to reduce
drug related incarceration,
both public and political views
of psychedelics are evolving.
Can this mark a
new turning point
for the field of psychology?
>> If psychedelics are going
to be successfully used
in biomedicine, we have to
completely revolutionize
the way that psychiatry
works, and it's likely that
the psychedelic therapies of the
future are going to look a lot
like shamanism.
Because shamanism is all
about creating an optimal set
and setting, and creating
the environment where
people can undergo these
experiences and integrate them.
In order to do that, you
have to completely change
the economic model,
a therapeutic model,
and everything else.
So that's a challenge.
>> But experts assert that a
psychedelic like ayahuasca is
an ordeal medicine.
Meaning you can't just
take it and forget it.
It has many properties
that heal the body.
But its most powerful
attribute is how much
psychological healing
people get from not only
the chemicals but
the experience.
>> There's a certain faction of
psychopharmacologist who think,
well, the psychedelic experience
in a psychedelic molecule is
a undesirable side effect.
And they want to try to engineer
the psychedelic experience out
of the molecule.
I think this is impossible.
I think this is a complete
misunderstanding of what
it is because psychedelics work
at this interface of the mind
and body.
And if you don't
have the experience,
it's not going to be reflected
on the physiological level,
on the neurochemical level.
>> Many people have experiences
with early life trauma with
ayahuasca.
Yes, many, many, many.
I would say that's very
common to see how experiences
from their early
life and childhood
or even adolescence may
be affecting their life
and their current experience.
Past life experience,
there's a few people that
have those kind of experiences.
I don't think that's as common
but it exists as a phenomenon.
>> The idea that one can access
memories from a previously
lived life is not a new one.
Some believe that recent
studies into our DNA
show how it might be possible.
In 2013, researchers
at Emory University
conducted a study
with mice concluding
that traumatic experiences could
alter DNA and pass those traits
down to future generations.
>> These mice were shocked
every time this certain smell is
presented to them.
Until finally, they're
so traumatized by that,
that just the smell alone will
elicit a fight or flight stress
response in them.
So then that gets passed down.
The baby mouse and
multiple generations
apparently now have a
sensitivity to that smell.
>> Usually, DNA mutations occur
when they benefit an organism
and they are gradually
passed down over generations.
But studies like the one
from Emory University
suggest that changes can
occur much more rapidly.
In humans, could this explain
why certain populations
appear to get stuck in cycles
of addiction and mental illness?
>> People have experiences
of their parent's childhood,
and then beyond that, and beyond
that deeper ancestral trauma.
There's people like Tony Moss.
He's out there speaking as
an African-American talking
about how he had a major
experience of the slavery
experience of his
ancestors and the way that
has come through
him and the healing
that he can potentially find
through working with plants
about that.
And there's many other
versions of that.
People just feel this
deep ancestral stuff
that they're letting
go of, sometimes
they don't know
exactly what it is.
>> So I would say that most
of the trauma that we carry
in our modern day has been
passed along our ancestors
for many, many generations.
If we really break it down,
what the psychedelics do
is they allow us to see
the nature of reality.
Ultimately, when
we start to address
these ancestral
traumas, we release
that for our entire lineage.
>> In 2015, a team of
researchers at the Icahn School
of Medicine released results
from a study that examined
the genes of 32 Jewish Holocaust
survivors and 22 children
of Holocaust survivors
born after the war.
Previous studies show
that children of survivors
showed a higher risk
of developing disorders
like depression and anxiety.
While their findings are
disputed by some scholars,
they found that changes
in the DNA of survivors
caused by the Holocaust were
passed down to their offspring.
>> We need to remember
that we are a continuation.
We are part of a lineage,
so we have whatever traumas
and experiences we may have had.
And those, we hold
it in our cells,
we hold it in our
organs, we hold it
in our connective tissue.
We even hold it in
our DNA or the way
our DNA is read,
our epigenetics.
But we also are
holding experiences
of our parents, grandparents,
great grandparents.
Then we also hold
collective trauma.
So psychedelics
allow us to access
our own personal experience,
our familial or lineage or
ancestral trauma, and
then in many cases,
we can have contact with
collective experiences
and collective wisdom
that we need to access.
>> Were our ancient ancestors
aware that we can hold this
collective trauma inside
and that we could use
the epigenetic power of these
medicines to heal that trauma?
A recent animal study
in Spain suggests
that Banisteriopsis caapi
preparations like ayahuasca
show antidepressant activity,
a therapeutic effect that
has been linked to
hippocampus neurogenesis
in adult mammals, the
creation of neurons involved
in emotion and memory.
Psychedelics appear to
stimulate parts of the brain
responsible for
autobiographical memory
and how our brains attribute
meaning and significance
to them.
For skilled
psychedelic journeyers,
this can help them
to reinterpret
meaning from past
traumas or life events.
>> The ability to step out
of your reference frame is,
I think, at the heart
of psychedelic healing.
For example, with
addiction, people
get into these feedback loops
with addictive substances.
They come to depend on them.
But psychedelics
that you step back
from that look at your behavior
in terms of your relationship
with the substance
like an opiate
or whatever, and say, this
needs to change, here's
the way to do it.
What you learn of the
psychedelic sessions
has to be applied.
The real work begins
after the session.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The Congo Basin,
Central Africa.
The second largest
rainforest in the world.
Its swamps, rivers,
and dense vegetation
spread across six countries.
It is home to thousands
of species of animals
and over 10,000
species of plants.
30% of which are
native to the area.
One of these native plants is
the tabernanthe money shrub,
more commonly called iboga.
Long used in
indigenous ceremonies
and traditional medicine,
iboga roughly translates
as "to care for" or "to heal."
Use of the plant
was first observed
by Western explorers in
the late 19th century,
and the main act of substance
called ibogaine was eventually
extracted in 1901.
It was sold throughout
France during the 1930s.
In those days, it
was found to be
a mental and physical
stimulant for depression,
medical recovery, fatigue,
and infectious disease.
Starting in the 1960s,
psychiatrist Claudio Naranjo
began testing ibogaine's
potential for psychotherapy.
He discovered ibogaine's ability
to dredge up lost memories
and resolve past
emotional trauma.
He reported that the
effects of the root
served as a catalyst
for self-discovery
with visions of the archetypes
cataloged by Carl Jung.
According to Naranjo,
these experiences
produce psychological
healing in test subjects.
>> Psychedelics allow us to
deal with childhood trauma
because they're able to
disconnect us from the part
of the ego that wants
to suppress this memory,
sweeten the memory, make it
seem like, oh, it wasn't so bad.
That's a mechanism
that's healthy in a way
to keep the person sane,
to keep the person going.
But it comes at a cost,
which is pushing something
under the rug.
And that under the rug
is the subconscious mind,
which controls conscious
reality 95% of the time.
This is the shadow basically
that Carl Jung speaks about.
So when we take
psychedelics, these things
come back but not in a
screaming and frightening way.
But there's a great
level of equanimity
to understand the nature
of what we did that was not
healthy to push something away.
When we put something
away, we create duality.
The self is the one
pushing that thing away,
the hand is part of me,
and what I'm pushing away
is also part of myself.
>> Cleveland, Ohio, 1947.
A 14-year-old boy goes into
cardiac arrest during surgery
to treat a congenital disorder.
His surgeon, Dr. Claude S
Beck, uses a defibrillator
to resuscitate him.
The first time in
history the technology
was used to bring someone
back from the brink of death.
Since that day,
more and more people
have been back from
the brink of death
and many have
returned with accounts
with what it feels like to die
and what the afterlife actually
looks like.
Interestingly, some
of these accounts
describe something quite
similar to the experience
of a psychedelic journey.
Many survivors describe
being enveloped
in darkness or the sensation
of moving through a tunnel,
as well as seeing
vivid lights and stars.
Most agree that they felt an
overwhelming sense of peace.
In Western culture,
death is feared,
and the traditions surrounding
the loss of a loved one
are deeply mournful.
But many look at
death in another way.
The German poet Johann Wolfgang
von Goethe said of death,
"die and become."
Mystery schools reenact death
with a "die before you die"
core belief.
The Greek philosopher
Socrates even
described death as something
to look forward to.
In North America, many
indigenous traditions
regard death as
natural and inevitable.
Some tribes allowed the dead
to decompose in open-air burial
platforms or trees,
illustrating how
they viewed the cycle of life
and death as a part of nature.
Why do indigenous cultures
seem to embrace the humility
and loss of ego that
comes with the acceptance
of our mortality?
While researching solutions for
treatment-resistant depression
in 2017, Dr. Robin
Carhart-Harris
discovered that psilocybin
induced reductions
of neuronal activity
in brain regions
such as the medial prefrontal
cortex and the anterior
cingulate cortex.
Why was this
discovery significant?
Because this is
where neurobiologists
believe our sense of self or
the ego is created and stored.
The death of the ego appears to
be a recurring theme in healing
and spiritual traditions.
So how can psychedelics be
useful for this purpose?
The personal journey of mixed
martial arts fighter Rashad
Evans may shed some clues.
From 2003 to 2018,
Rashad Evans was
one of the biggest stars in the
world of mixed martial arts.
A fearsome, perennial
contender Suga Rashad Evans
joined the UFC Hall
of Fame in 2019.
For years, Rashad was at the
top of his game, a success
by any measure.
Behind the scenes, however,
the competition and lifestyle
began to take a toll physically,
mentally, and spiritually.
>> It just kept me so locked
up into this Rashad Evans,
you know, who I thought I
was, who people thought I was.
Living from that
place, it really
was not me because it was
based off of something
that I accomplished.
And I'm not my accomplishments.
It was just a product of
things that I've done.
But then I started to live
in my accomplishment body.
And before I know it, whenever
that character would lose,
it was something that
was very disorienting
for Rashad Evans the person.
After a while of having so
many ups and downs in a career,
I just want to get off the ride.
You know, I wanted to be
able to lose and win and not
feel the stain on who
I was as a person.
That's what made me really
want to start to dig deeper
and to find out who I am
and why I'm even here.
>> For Rashad the defining
moment was when he found
himself at a crossroads.
He was struggling between
finding a deeper purpose
or continuing his
fighting career.
His journey with plant
medicines began in earnest
after an experience with DMT.
>> It showed me that I was
not this physical body.
It showed me that what I was,
was beyond space and time.
It showed me that
what I was a part of,
this collective consciousness,
we all are part of,
and in a way, it showed me
the way to really connect,
was to connect
with myself first.
And that's something
I struggle with.
I struggle with
understanding how
do I connect with the
rest of the world.
And the truth of the
matter was it was just
a matter of just
connecting with myself.
>> This shedding of ego and
realization of a collective
consciousness during a
psychedelic experience that
Rashad Evans had, has been
described as ego death.
Is it possible that
the ego death is
a death of our own archetypes?
The human body and
nature seem to intertwine
to bring us this answer.
To that end, ayahuasca, a
natural provider of DMT,
has been called the
vine of the dead.
Traditionally taken at night
when most people are asleep,
the experience is
often explained
as taking a journey
after leaving one's body.
This dovetails with many
traditional and religious
descriptions of the afterlife.
>> Ego death is when we let
go of our orientation in this
current reality that we're in.
It's disrupting the
idea of separation,
being a separate entity
or being, and who you are.
And that part of you
dissolving and merging
back in with the web of life.
This unitive or
transpersonal experience
can be very different
depending on the psychedelic
that you take, and depending
on how deep you can
surrender to that experience.
>> Ego death is that
experience of surrendering
into our interconnectedness.
Rather than seeing how
we are all separate
and it's only about me
and mine, that ego death
is seeing how important
it is that we realize
that we are on this
planet Earth together
and that we need
to work together
to solve some of these
tremendous concerns
that we all have.
And I feel that ego death in
the psychedelic experience
can also be sort of a
dress rehearsal for dying.
We can perhaps embrace
death with a lot less fear
and anxiety if we have these
dress rehearsals in our life.
>> So this ego death is
losing the notion of the self
in experience where the
individual and the experience
are one.
And that's the non-dual state
that the Sufis were looking
for and called al-fanaa--
the state of thought
of dissolution
of the ego, which is similar to
the Samadhi state, the Satori
state, the Kensho state.
And that's a very important
state for humans to seek.
Psychedelics give
us the opportunity
to experience it
in a powerful way,
but we need to learn to
surrender, allow, trust,
and accept, and to be in
a safe environment working
with a reliable person who is
facilitating keeping us safe,
keep our guests
working on track.
>> The ego death, that's part of
this disabling the default mode
network.
A lot of what the default
mode network is all about
is about maintaining that ego
and that sense of self, the I
function.
When you dissolve that, then
that temporarily goes away.
The insights that come
out of these mystical type
experiences, you know,
people say, well, you know,
we're all one.
There is no separation.
It demolishes the sense of a
separation between ourselves
and the cosmos.
And you know, your ego
will reconstruct itself
but it might reconstruct
itself in a better way.
Maybe you're a
little kinder, maybe
you're a little more empathic,
a little less arrogant,
and maybe less egotistical.
You can re-understand
your existential situation
in a different way.
>> Perhaps these plants are
calling humans to come learn
death before we die.
Healing the mind, and
clearing epigenetic residue
could make up the core of how
psychedelic plants teach us
how not to fear death.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Up next, we explore
the default mode matrix
that humanity's brains
aren't trained by,
and how psychedelic plant
teachers can lead the way out
of this complex maze.
[MUSIC PLAYING]